
Reflecting on the dysfunctional state of the world, it's hard not to suspect that there's some sort of evil conspiracy lurking behind it all. In a sense, there actually is, but it is *infinitely more strange* than we can fathom. The only way to end it is to recognize its existence within our very own minds. Only by freeing ourselves from its insidious grip do we gain the capacity to free others.

---

Have you ever done something that you believed was right at the time, only to realize much later that it was actually wrong — even according to your own deepest standards? It is a bizarre sort of experience. You are confronted with the fact that on some level, you knew it was wrong even as you did it — yet you managed to hide this knowledge from yourself, so that in another sense, you really *didn't* know. Every one of us engages in such "conscience skirting," whether we realize it or not. Indeed, it is those of us who are least aware of it who are most engaged in it.

What is it that allows us to hide knowledge of our wrongdoing from our own conscious minds? This state is a paradoxical one: we simultaneously *know* and yet somehow *do not.* It is this phenomenon that is responsible for *all the evil there ever was,* from the tiniest act of unkindness to the most horrific atrocity ever committed. Our examples may differ in degree, but not in kind — and every time any one of us engages in it, we lower the threshold for others to do the same.

We never notice when we ourselves are in it, but we're highly sensitive to its presence in others. It makes us perceive them as *bad people*, who we then feel compelled to treat accordingly. We believe that by treating the "bad people" with contempt — that is, as though they are *fundamentally defective* — we will somehow benefit the world. But if you look carefully enough into your mind while feeling this way — and this is hard — you'll discover something much more insidious at work.

Contempt is a fundamentally malicious attitude, and simply by harboring it, you are telegraphing to your target that you're in the grip of self-deception yourself. You may feel like you're "fighting evil," but deep down, you know that you're only liable to make them dig in their heels — which you can then use as evidence that you were right about them, thus compelling you to escalate. Something in us *wants* to be forced to unleash the full extent of our righteous wrath — perhaps the most delicious feeling of all.

Although you may not realize that you're doing this — at least, consciously — your enemy subconsciously does, which is *why* they dig in their heels. They are perceiving in you the very error that you are viciously judging them for, which makes them perceive *you* as "evil" for precisely the same reason you see *them* that way. Any compunction they might have felt about their own wrongdoing goes out the window — which is precisely the result you secretly wanted.

What happened is that the darkness in your own mind recognized itself in your enemy, who it then lured into this trap. It is like a *secret handshake* between your darkness and theirs. The world is darkened as a result, but we don't notice this — or if we do, we blame it on them. After all, any *decent* person would have repented, or at least introspected, in the face of such overwhelming good. We have created *new evil* in the world, but we tell ourselves that we're simply uncovering the evil already there. After all, they are *fundamentally* defective, and so nothing *we* did could have made any difference.

This is just one of an infinite number of ways the darkness tricks us into doing its bidding while flawlessly convinced that we are helping. The truth is that *any* time we skirt our conscience — which is *far more often* than we realize — we are secretly inviting others to do the same, who we can then blame for the sorry state of the world, thereby licensing ourselves to engage in *more* self-serving behavior that we will never recognize as such.

This is how the darkness keeps itself alive; cleverly hiding itself from our own minds while powerfully sensitizing us to its presence in others. We don't recognize that they are in the grip of a delusion that we ourselves are highly susceptible to; no, we see *their* evil as intrinsic, compelling us to viciously attack it. We never realize that this feeling of *moral superiority* is itself the surest sign that we are under its dark sway. A mind that is free of self-deception simply cannot feel malice, contempt, or even self-righteousness toward *anybody* for any reason.

This is the opposite of what society teaches us: that to be "good people," we must show our contempt for the "bad people." In a way, this isn't entirely wrong: contempt for *beliefs* and *behaviors* can indeed come from a good place. But it almost always degenerates into contempt for the people themselves. All goodwill drains from our hearts, and we embrace the darkness, convincing ourselves that in this case, it isn't really darkness at all. In fact, we can *prove* it.

This could all be avoided if we learned to listen to our hearts instead of focusing exclusively on our minds. Our thoughts can be freely manipulated by the darkness, which is why it is so easy to justify evil behavior. Our thoughts are the perfect vector for the darkness to sneak in, without us ever suspecting it. If you *really* want to know whether you're acting from your inner Light or from your darkness, you cannot blindly trust your mind. You must learn to see deeper.

The vast majority of dark behavior feels nothing at all like evil. It simply feels like "business as usual." We find all kinds of ways to justify subtly self-serving behavior, covering it up with clever cover stories about all the good it will do. These justifications have a certain "signature" to them that you can learn to perceive, both in yourself and in others. When you recognize it, stay far away. You can be *certain* that no good will come of it, no matter how cleverly anyone proves otherwise. Disregard this at your own peril — and at everyone else's, too.

The darkness dims our perception of the *life* in others — be they people, animals, or nature at large — so that we cannot feel the deep sense of wrongness that comes from dominating, exploiting, or mistreating them. It's not that we *can't* feel it; it's that the darkness *blinds* us to it. It is this phenomenon that enables genocides, our ravaging of the planet — and, perhaps most surprisingly, our hatred for the people who engage in these atrocities.

It is impossible to overstate just how insidious the darkness is. It behaves like a _singular distributed malevolent entity_, manipulating all of humanity from beneath our conscious thresholds. The Christians know it as the Devil, and the Buddhists call it the ego. You can treat it as a metaphor, but it is as real as anything you can touch. It is the _primordial_ evil conspiracy; the one to which all the rest owe their existence, and to which they ultimately filter up. 

We are learning to recognize that "the elites" are playing us against each other, to take our attention off of them — but the Darkness is playing a _much bigger game_; one in which even the elites are merely pawns. It _needs_ us to hate them, to keep the whole cycle alive. By keeping our attention fixated perpetually outward, on the evil "out there," we never notice its insidious presence "in here"; the one place where we can actually defeat it.

It is only once you've seen how thoroughly the Darkness has ensnared your own mind that you begin to appreciate what is taking place in the minds of the "bad people" — and exactly how to free them of it. Without seeing this, it is *only* possible to drive them deeper into its sinister clutches, while feeling flawlessly convinced that you are "helping." So how do we see it?

---

There can be moments in life — such as during psychedelic trips, near-death experiences, or deep meditation or prayer — when you are confronted with the full depths of your own self-deception. You are shown every single instance where you skirted your conscience; every act of lying to yourself for your own personal gain. You are brought face-to-face with all the harm you've ever perpetrated since time immemorial, and it is more than you could ever hope to clean up in a single lifetime. The pain is beyond what you can fathom; more than you can bear. How widely and quickly it spread! How many it affected! The darkness exploited your fear and pride, enabling you to do things you otherwise couldn't if only you had been seeing clearly.

But slowly, it dawns on you: the reason it hurts so much is that you never actually wanted to do any of this. It is only profound confusion that enabled it. Your whole being is then absorbed into that part of you that never wanted to hurt anyone; never _could_ want such a thing. Then, suddenly, the full mass of darkness is lifted from your mind. It feels exactly like being freed of a demonic possession. Beneath it is a Light so vast that it defies description; an infinite Love for all of reality that excludes nothing and forsakes no-one. You never truly departed from this Light; indeed, never could, because it turns out you _are_ the Light! But the big reveal is that, astonishingly, *so is everyone else*.

In fact, you ultimately _are_ everyone and everything else, just pretending that you're not. One consciousness, peering out through countless eyes. There are many ways to say this, all of which sound absurd to the rational mind. But when you fully unveil the Light in yourself, you automatically see it in everyone else — including those who convincingly seemed not to have any. This is what the darkness is trying to hide. Everything we do to each other — or to Nature herself — we ultimately do to ourselves. How crazy to think otherwise! How foolish to judge others for not seeing it, when we weren't able to see it yet ourselves! Such a silly game we play, with such tragic consequences. We are continually shoving each other into the abyss to prevent others from waking up, because we're not ready to wake up ourselves. Seeing this, we lose all desire to "get away" with any form of misbehavior. Why would we want to hide from the Light? How did we ever think we could? The sooner we see give this up, the better for everyone.

The strangest part is discovering how you simultaneously _knew_ this and yet somehow _didn't_. You convinced yourself that your unkind behavior was "for the greater good," even as you knew better. You could always perceive the inner Light in the "bad people," and you chose to smother it anyway — knowing that if you compartmentalized this knowledge carefully enough, nobody could blame you for it, because _you yourself_ would no longer know. Yet others could somehow sense what you were doing, and it gave them an excuse to pin the darkness on you. It is only now that you see how they were only lost in the same confusion that you were, that you are able to truly forgive them. You discover the surprising sense in which nobody actually _wants_ to harbor the darkness — or rather, how their apparent desire to harbor it is simply the Universe balancing out our own desperate need to externalize our own; almost like a conservation law. We should practically thank them for becoming the scapegoats that we needed.

You see for the first time _how_ others could sense what you were really doing, despite your astonishingly clever attempts to hide it. At the very deepest level, your mind is not truly separate from theirs, or from the world at large. It's not that others can read your mind, per se, but your deepest motivations inevitably weave themselves into the fabric of your "outer" reality; the two being fundamentally inseparable. The deepest choice of all is whether to stand firm in your Light or give in to the impostor. It is a choice you make in every moment, whether you know it or not — and the cumulative result determines your ultimate impact on the world. Others can sense your choices at a subconscious level, and these subtly influence their own. Our culture has convinced itself that this is mystical nonsense, despite it being right under our noses. We do this so that we can harbor our demons while pretending this has no consequences. The more we heal as a species, the more this worldview evaporates.

There is no way to force others to see any of this; force being a manifestation of the same fundamental mistake. Those who are most powerful at inducing this realization in others are simply those who hold it most strongly themselves. They are literally incapable of feeling malice, contempt, or self-righteousness, having thoroughly seen through them as horsemen of the darkness. Yet they are not weak. They are unafraid to fiercely confront the darkness in others. Being free of darkness themselves, they are immune to its sinister charms. This enables their accusations to penetrate other minds, instead of being deflected by the defense mechanisms that the rest of us unwittingly trigger. Their attack therefore finds its mark — which is the darkness itself, and not the confused being who unwittingly harbors it — even if the being needs to be harmed in the process. This is all very difficult to describe, but part of you knows exactly what I mean.

In the same way that your darkness can extend a secret handshake to theirs, your Light can do the same. It is nowhere near as violently pleasurable as attacking the darkness, but infinitely more valuable. This process can take a long time to unfold, and require many iterations — but it is the _only_ way that darkness is released from our world.

---

If we ultimately are the Light, how on Earth did we get to this place that looks nothing like it? This process is extremely tricky to convey, because it doesn't fit into our culture's standard metaphysics. You could say it all began with a subtle turn away from the Light. Then, fearing that we'd lost contact with our _absolute_ goodness, we went out seeking for it _relatively_ — that is, at the expense of apparent "others." We felt that we had to make them _bad_, and then violently defeat them, to earn our way back to our original goodness. But this just made things worse, and it quickly spiraled out of control. This is the apparent reality in which we now live.

The hardest thing to communicate about this story is that it does not unfold in what we normally conceive of as linear time. In a profound and surprising sense, every moment is the very first. Thus, every instant is an opportunity to rediscover our primordial Home, a place we never truly left. Each time we see this, we increasingly discover how our judgements of others are actually pointers back to an unhealed part of ourselves. As we heal ourselves, we discover how to heal our relationship with the "other," until it slowly dawns on us that there was never truly an "other." The more we see this, the more we vow to hold the Light for these seeming others, even when — indeed, _especially_ when — they cannot hold it for themselves. Far from being a burden, we discover that this has always been our true purpose; our deepest calling. Every encounter with evil becomes an opportunity to strengthen our commitment to the Light.

Looked at this way, kindness is anything that brings us all closer to remembering the truth, and evil is anything that pushes us away from it. Forsaking others is thus always a form of evil. It is a form of forsaking ourselves, because we are not ready to come Home yet. If this language feels too religious for you, feel free to find your own framing. In the end, there is only one truth anyway.

---

Unlike the Light, the darkness is not a real entity. It is a profound absence masquerading as a presence. It is ultimately only our willingness to turn away from our Light, instead listening to our agendas and justifications. As such, it can never be defeated by more absence. Yet make no mistake: although it is an absence, it still behaves like a sinister presence; a parasite of the mind. The darkness you see your enemies is the very _same_ entity that exists in your own mind, and that provokes you into seeing theirs as intrinsic. It manipulates your perception at such a fundamental level that you simply cannot fathom that you're being fooled. You're certain that you're seeing reality _as it is_. It is an _impossibly_ clever trick.

It is difficult to overstate just how much of our civilization is built on the shaky foundations of our aggregate self-deception. Every time any one of us skirts our conscience in any way, we contribute to the universal bank of darkness. Revenge fantasy films, YouTube videos of "Karens getting owned," vicious Facebook threads full of casual cruelty — each is a breeding ground for our collective demons. It all seeps into our physical reality, poisoning it. Everything from our unhealthy air, water, and soil, to our myriad societal ills and the climate crisis, is ultimately an external manifestation of a sickness within. As long as we perceive this sickness to exist only in others, we will never discover the hidden aspect of our own minds that secretly enables it, continually confusing our contempt for our authentic good. This is in no way suggesting that we are all equally complicit, by any stretch of the imagination. Nonetheless, we each have a profound role to play in leading the world back to the Light.

We've been led astray by a society that points us in precisely the wrong direction to accomplish this, although that is nobody's fault in particular. Our power does not lie in lording our superiority over others — including the "bad people" — but in discovering our surprising commonality with them. This is not some kumbaya sentiment, either. Genuine kindness has nothing to do with being nice. But it does not misperceive evil as being intrinsic to any mind, and this seemingly-subtle change makes all the difference. The profound integrity of this act prevents the darkness in others from finding the "hook" in our own that it would normally use to justify itself, and is thereby weakened. Although we may still be enemies on the surface, our Light is becoming allied. We are beginning to remember how this whole game actually works.

To be clear: it does no good to pretend that you can see the Light in others when you can't. Doing so can backfire miserably. Thus, both pretending to see the Light and overlooking it are harmful. The only solution is to learn to actually see it, which happens naturally as you uncover your own. Similarly, it is astonishingly easy to lie to ourselves about whether our violent behavior is radical kindness or merely self-deception. This is how the darkness sneaks in. Perhaps the clearest measure of our own ability to deceive ourselves is how much contempt we are able to muster for our enemies; the "bad people." To the degree that this potential is present, we are susceptible to sliding down the dark path that has enabled every atrocity there ever was, without ever realizing that we've done so. All that is required is the right — or wrong — confluence of circumstances. This happens faster than you can imagine, and you _do not_ want to find yourself there. You _will_ have to confront it, sooner or later.

---

Everything we do makes a difference, in ways that we can hardly fathom. There are vast and subtle networks of causality that we are normally unconscious of, and that secretly drive the fate of the world. If we pay attention only to the surface activity, we miss out on the bulk of what actually shapes our reality. Evil can look sweet and pretty, while kindness sometimes looks harsh. It is impossible to know which is which — and easy to convince ourselves otherwise — until we have done the deep inner work that eradicates the core confusion. We each catch glimpses from time to time, and it is our duty to carry those glimpses into the world as best we are able. I wish I could tell you that I have completed the journey myself, but alas, I am a mere fledgling. I am still liable to mess things up royally, and I hope you will hold my feet to the fire when I do. I promise to do the same for you.

May all beings be free from suffering and its causes. Amen.