
> _Be kind, for everyone you meet is fighting a great battle._ —Author unknown

It is easy to be kind to someone when we can see — or even just *believe* — that some part of them is trying. When we can't, we devolve into contempt. This attitude is lazy and harmful, because there is literally _always_ a part of people that is trying. (Actually, as we shall see later, it is not merely lazy: part of us is actually _motivated_ to feel contempt.)

Consider depression. Nobody _wants_ to be depressed. Or rather, people may _act_ like they do, and even _say_ that they do — in which case it is probably kindest to believe them — but the very deepest aspect of their mind simply _couldn't_ want such a thing, if it could see clearly what it was choosing. A person may recognize this only after being free of it, and look back on it like a bizarre dream.

It wasn't until recently that empathy for the depressed became a social norm. Until then, contempt seemed to many like a perfectly healthy response, and sympathy was equated with coddling. Today, we know better: depending on the person and situation, either firmness or gentleness may be appropriate, but in neither case does an underlying attitude of contempt help anything. The justification that "coddling is bad, so cruelty is good" is self-serving nonsense; an excuse for our dark tendencies. It is an attempt to feel superior disguised as help.

Advances in neuroscience certainly helped drive this cultural shift, but were they really necessary? Once we knew that brains and genes were a thing, did we really need the exact details to know that empathy was right? Did anyone ever doubt that depression had _some_ physiological basis? Anyone "with the eyes to see" could directly perceive that contempt was the wrong approach without needing proof.

The same is true for alcoholism, addiction, obesity, and countless other conditions. It seems we have to re-learn the same lesson each time, using new science as justification — even though it is always possible to see that the deepest aspect of people's minds simply couldn't want to suffer. This "empathy shortcut" allows one to see that contempt makes zero sense in such situations. "Tough love" may still be required, but it is still a form of love, not contempt — and the deepest aspect of *our* mind knows the difference. Our descendants will surely wonder how we ever overlooked this.

What may be harder to see is that this "base layer of mind" also doesn't want _others_ to suffer. People certainly act like they do, and even sometimes say that they do — in which case it is dangerously naive not to believe them — but something surprisingly similar is going on beneath the surface. Their confused state is generated by a haze of profound delusion that would horrify them should they manage to break free of it. I do not have the neuroscience to prove this to you (yet), but it is plain for anyone with the eyes to see. It is not merely a belief.

Contempt for "perpetrators" is bad for exactly the same reason as for "victims": it merely compounds the delusion that's causing the problem to begin with. Theirs is simply a more cleverly disguised form of mental illness. Contempt for them is still  an attempt to feel superior disguised as help. The very deepest part of us knows this, but that knowledge somehow isn't reaching our conscious awareness.

The opposite attitude would be "compassion" or "kindness." **Crucially, this doesn't mean being nice**. In the same way that we might need to be firm with the mentally ill, we may need to be even more firm — perhaps even violent[^dalai-lama-gun] — with people who "want" to cause harm. Such a response may even *look* like contempt. But *genuine* contempt comes from a completely different source; a deeply malicious one. The two should never be confused[^confusion].

It can be very hard to see how this seemingly-subtle distinction could matter. After all, violence is violence, right? But it's not. People are _ridiculously_ sensitive to our intentions, and malice generates very different long-term consequences than benevolence, even when the outward behaviors look similar. This may not be obvious from the immediate (or even second- or third-order) effects, but again, it is visible to those with eyes to see.

Social norms have largely robbed us of our ability to feel superior when treating mentally ill people (or mentally retarded people, or those with different skin color, ...) with contempt. People who do that are rightfully seen as wrong in the head themselves. But then we turn right around and treat _them_ with contempt — unable to see that we are repeating the same fundamental mistake.

If you don't yet have "the eyes to see" this, then compassion for evildoers may sound hopelessly naive. But if so, then I contend that your mind is still under the grip of a powerful delusion. You may *say* that contempt is more helpful — and even believe it — but there will (hopefully) come a time when you are horrified by this confusion. The very deepest layer of your mind cannot want to feel contempt for **anyone**. If you could clearly see the choice you were making, you wouldn't make it.

Alas, just like we can't talk people out of depression, addiction, or evil, I can't talk you (or even myself) out of contempt for "bad people." There is something that must be _seen_.

When all desire for harm (for oneself and others) is eliminated from the mind, what remains isn't apathy or neutrality. Surprisingly, it is an impossibly fierce and uncompromising love for the world — one that is able to deal with all kinds of situations in a healthy way[^jesus].

My hope for humanity is that we discover this. I believe that our very existence depends on it.

---

### Afterword

What if part of us is somehow _motivated_ to see people as "not even trying"? We explore that in [the next piece](http://www.contemptisevil.org).

---

[^dalai-lama-gun]: The Dalai Lama was once asked what you should do if a gunman is trying to shoot you and you have a gun. [He said "shoot back."](https://www.snopes.com/fact-check/dalai-gun/)

[^jesus]: This is what guys like Jesus and Buddha realized (and many gals, too). They weren't suppressing the tendency for malice and contempt; they were simply free of the profound illness that enables them. I'm sure they didn't see themselves as "good people"; they were probably grateful to finally be mentally healthy. When we fancy ourselves virtuous for hating the "bad guys" in defense of the "good guys," we are desecrating the profound legacy they left us.

[^confusion]: In truth, the ease of confusing them is what gives our mind the "plausible deniability" it requires to be cruel without compunction.
