
# Evil: a mental illness

tl;dr: 

- "Evil" is a form of mental illness. Once this is seen clearly, it is obvious that contempt just compounds the problem.
- Harming such a person may still be necessary, but whether we enact this behavior through compassion or contempt makes all the difference.
- The "deeper" their evil, the harder it is for us to recognize why contempt is harmful — and the more dangerous such a failure becomes.

---

> _Be kind, for everyone you meet is fighting a great battle._ —Author unknown

It is easy to be kind to someone when we can see — or even just believe — that some part of them is _trying_. When we can't, we devolve into contempt. This attitude is lazy and harmful, because there is literally _always_ a part that is trying, buried under a maze of confusion. Contempt just pushes them further in, making it even more obvious to us that no part of them is trying.

Consider depression. Nobody _wants_ to be depressed. Or rather, people may _act_ like they do, and even _say_ that they do — in which case it is probably kindest to believe them — but the very deepest aspect of their mind simply _couldn't_ want such a thing, if it could see clearly what it was choosing. A person may recognize this only after being free of it, and look back on it like a bizarre dream.

It wasn't until recently that empathy for the depressed became a social norm. Until then, contempt seemed to many like a perfectly healthy response, and sympathy was equated with coddling. Today, we know better: depending on the person and situation, either firmness or gentleness may be appropriate, but in neither case does an underlying attitude of contempt help anything. The justification that "coddling is bad, so cruelty is good" is self-serving nonsense.

Advances in neuroscience certainly helped drive this cultural shift, but were they really necessary? Once we knew that brains and genes were a thing, did we really need the exact details to know that empathy was right? Did anyone ever doubt that depression had _some_ physiological basis? Anyone "with the eyes to see" could directly perceive that contempt was the wrong approach without needing proof.

The same is true for alcoholism, addiction, obesity, and countless other conditions. It seems we have to re-learn the same lesson each time, using new science as justification — even though it is always possible to see that the deepest aspect of people's minds simply couldn't want to suffer. This "empathy shortcut" allows one to see that contempt makes zero sense in such situations. "Tough love" may still be required, but it is still a form of love, not contempt — and the deepest aspect of *our* mind knows the difference. Our descendants will surely wonder how we ever overlooked this.

What may be harder to see is that this "base layer of mind" also doesn't want _others_ to suffer. People certainly act like they do, and even sometimes say that they do — in which case it is dangerously naive not to believe them — but something surprisingly similar is going on beneath the surface. Their confused state is generated by a haze of profound delusion that would horrify them should they manage to break free of it. I do not have the neuroscience to prove this to you (yet), but it is plain for anyone with the eyes to see.

Contempt for "perpetrators" is bad for exactly the same reason as for "victims": it merely compounds the delusion that's causing the problem to begin with. Theirs is simply a more cleverly disguised form of mental illness. The very deepest part of us knows this, but that knowledge somehow isn't reaching our conscious awareness. As we will soon see, this is a motivated ignorance.

Of *actual* help would be compassion. **Crucially, this doesn't mean being nice**. In the same way that we might need to be firm with the mentally ill, we may need to be even more firm — perhaps even violent[^dalai-lama-gun] — with people who "want" to cause harm. Our response may even *look* like contempt. But *genuine* contempt comes from a completely different source; a deeply malicious one. The two should never be confused: **one is a thirst for harm performed in the name of good, while the other is an expression of profound love for the world necessitating harm in its execution.**

These are easy to tell apart from the inside if you know where to look — but we train ourselves _not_ to look, and with repeated practice, we forget how. We begin to rely on a dangerous shortcut: _I'm a good person, so obviously my intention is good — and how could it matter anyway?_ Moreover, because they can look so similar from the outside, it's hard for _others_ to tell which one we're doing — at least, consciously.

Yet subconsciously, both we and others _can_ tell whether our intention is  benevolent or malicious, and they generate very different long-term consequences. They have profoundly different effects on all minds involved, and this difference ripples outward. This may not be obvious from the immediate (or even second- or third-order) effects, but again, a deep part of us knows this.

That will be a recurring theme throughout this work: there are things that I cannot convince you of with any amount of evidence, unless you want to see them. But luckily, some part of you already knows them. Ultimately all I can do is encourage you to look there.

Social norms have largely robbed us of our ability to feel superior when treating mentally ill people (or mentally retarded people, or those with different skin color, ...) with contempt. People who do that are rightfully seen as wrong in the head themselves. But then we turn right around and treat _them_ with contempt — unable to see that we are repeating the same fundamental mistake.

If you don't yet have "the eyes to see" this, then compassion for evildoers may sound hopelessly naive. But if so, then I contend that your mind is still under the grip of a powerful delusion. You may *say* that contempt is more helpful — and even believe it — but there will (hopefully) come a time when you are horrified by this confusion. The very deepest layer of your mind cannot want to feel contempt for **anyone**. If you could clearly see the choice you were making, you wouldn't make it.

Alas, simply _knowing_ that it's harmful doesn't stop it from _feeling_ right. Why? Also, what if the harm caused by our contempt is offset by the good it somehow accomplishes? We explore these in the next chapter. There is something that must be _seen_.

---

## FAQ

### There are some who can be "loved out of" evil, and others who seem to use kindness as _fuel_ for evil. Surely there's a distinction here that matters?

This is a deep and important question. Assuming that evil is always caused by a level of trauma that can be simply "loved" out of a person (in any conventional sense) can indeed be dangerous, and may demonstrate lack of wisdom on our part. It would be a mistake to lump all causes of evil into the same bucket and deal with them in the same way.

Nevertheless, while the methods may differ, in no case does an underlying malicious intent actually help. Instead, the "deeper" the evil, the easier it is to _convince_ ourselves that it does — but this is always self-deception, as we shall soon see. What's actually happening is that their profound darkness is more easily (and cleverly) infecting our minds.

---

> _Like many of you (I'm sure), psilocybin has changed the way I see this world, and the people around me. It has torn my heart open on many occasions and revealed to me how my actions effect other people in ways I would've never imagined. In addition, psilocybin has increased my ability to empathize with people to a degree I never thought possible._
>
> _I consider this a blessing, but it has also led me to a very troubling conclusion:_
>
> _The lack of compassion, empathy and love we (society) feel for each other is staggering. Especially between people who don't know each other. The more love and empathy I feel for others, the more aware I am of society's inability to feel it for each other._
>
> _Does this make sense? Does it mean this blessing is really a curse? Because sometimes, it feels that way._
> 
> — A guy from some online forum

(A beautiful answer to this question is coming in the chapter on psychedelics.)

---

[^dalai-lama-gun]: The Dalai Lama was once asked what you should do if a gunman is trying to shoot you and you have a gun. [He said "shoot back."](https://www.snopes.com/fact-check/dalai-gun/)

[^jesus]: This is what guys like Jesus and Buddha realized (and many gals, too). They weren't suppressing the tendency for malice and contempt; they were simply free of the profound illness that enables them. I'm sure they didn't see themselves as "good people"; they were probably grateful to finally be mentally healthy. When we fancy ourselves virtuous for hating the "bad guys" in defense of the "good guys," we are desecrating the profound legacy they left us.
