It is hard to admit, but there is darkness within each of us. It is not _intrinsic_ to our minds, but is more like a parasite. It knows that we are unwilling to harm people unless we see them as less than human — which most of us know is wrong. So it uses a clever trick: it alters our perception so that we see the darkness as intrinsic to some people's minds. We call them "bad people" and see them as subhuman, so that harming them becomes not just okay, but positively righteous.

Consciously, we don't realize that we're being manipulated; it feels like we're expressing a natural and healthy instinct to violently attack evil — which we now mistakenly equate with attacking the _people_. But no matter how subdued our attack (e.g., mockery), our underlying malicious intent makes us appear evil to them for exactly the same reason that they appear evil to us.

This has the effect of driving their darkness deeper into their minds, making it appear even more surely intrinsic, which inspires even more righteous violence from us, in a downward spiral. We act dismayed by their recalcitrance, but our darkness actually orchestrated this descent. We may not be conscious of this, but our "victim" is certain that we are, again for the same reason that we are sure that _their_ evil is fully volitional.

Our darkness tricks us into behaving in ways that will convince others that ours is intrinsic, because it knows exactly how theirs operates and will respond — _because ours and theirs are identical_. In fact, they are not just identical, but are more like outgrowths of a single shared "shadowy presence" that continually manipulates all of our minds; the _Devil_, if you will.

This is not just a wacky religious idea: it seems that everyone who introspects carefully enough eventually perceives this "distributed malevolent entity" which has a kind of intelligence and volition of its own that, even if not _literally_ true, explain its seemingly-coordinated behavior far more accurately than if ours were independent.

It is the primordial "evil global conspiracy," and it lives in all of our minds. Every attempt to maliciously subdue it "out there" just strengthens it, because such behavior is only ever initiated by it, even though it makes us believe that it was initiated by us. Contempt is its most insidious tool precisely because it appears to be the most unmistakably righteous.

There may well be groups of particularly darkened people who conspire to cause great harm, but their existence wouldn't be possible if the rest of us weren't feeding the source — and conversely, it is _inevitable_ given that we are. **We must hold such people accountable**, but when we do this with contempt, we are injecting more evil into the world. It _will_ find a way to manifest somewhere, though we will disown all complicity for it.

The only way for humanity to defeat the Devil is to stop falling for its tricks. Any time you feel malice, hatred, contempt, or even self-righteousness toward another being; any time you see them as fundamentally defective or inferior; you are being manipulated, and this _will_ create more evil. As you begin to clear up this misperception in your own mind, you discover what is causing it in others'. Only then can you do anything genuinely useful about it.

The topic of what such "useful" behavior looks like is vast and is beyond our scope. Such behavior depends entirely on circumstances, and is impossible to reduce to principles, except for one: the more deeply it is rooted in compassion — i.e., free of the above misperception — the more beneficial it tends to be. Being _entirely_ free is enlightenment; perception of our fundamental unity. (Note that this profound unity is also what allows the Devil to exist.) Rest assured that compassionate action _can_ be outwardly violent.

